\" Man page for supervisor functions
.TH HIVE_SUPERVISOR 3 "January 2025" "Hive 1.0" "Actor Runtime Manual"
.SH NAME
hive_supervisor_start, hive_supervisor_stop, hive_restart_strategy_str, hive_child_restart_str \- supervisor for actor management
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <hive_supervisor.h>
.PP
.BI "hive_status hive_supervisor_start(const hive_supervisor_config *" config ","
.BI "                                  const actor_config *" sup_actor_cfg ","
.BI "                                  actor_id *" out_supervisor ");"
.BI "hive_status hive_supervisor_stop(actor_id " supervisor ");"
.BI "const char *hive_restart_strategy_str(hive_restart_strategy " strategy ");"
.BI "const char *hive_child_restart_str(hive_child_restart " restart ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions implement a supervisor for managing child actors.
A supervisor monitors its children and automatically restarts them according to
configurable policies when they crash.
.SS Child Restart Types
.TP
.B HIVE_CHILD_PERMANENT
Always restart the child, regardless of exit reason.
.TP
.B HIVE_CHILD_TRANSIENT
Restart only on abnormal exit (crash). Normal exits are not restarted.
.TP
.B HIVE_CHILD_TEMPORARY
Never restart. Once the child exits, it stays dead.
.SS Restart Strategies
.TP
.B HIVE_STRATEGY_ONE_FOR_ONE
When a child crashes, only that child is restarted. Other children continue
running undisturbed. Use for independent workers.
.TP
.B HIVE_STRATEGY_ONE_FOR_ALL
When any child crashes, all children are stopped and restarted. Use when
children have strong interdependencies.
.TP
.B HIVE_STRATEGY_REST_FOR_ONE
When a child crashes, that child and all children started after it are
restarted. Children started before continue running. Use for pipelines
or sequential dependencies.
.SS Child Specification
.PP
.nf
typedef struct {
    const char *id;              /* Identifier for logging */
    actor_fn fn;                 /* Actor entry point */
    void *arg;                   /* Argument to pass */
    size_t arg_size;             /* Size to copy (0 = pointer) */
    hive_child_restart restart;  /* Restart policy */
    actor_config actor_cfg;      /* Actor config */
} hive_child_spec;
.fi
.PP
If
.I arg_size
is non-zero, the argument is copied to supervisor-managed storage
(up to HIVE_MAX_MESSAGE_SIZE bytes). If zero, the pointer is passed directly.
.SS Supervisor Configuration
.PP
.nf
typedef struct {
    hive_restart_strategy strategy;  /* How to handle failures */
    uint32_t max_restarts;           /* Max restarts in period */
    uint32_t restart_period_ms;      /* Time window (ms) */
    const hive_child_spec *children; /* Child specifications */
    size_t num_children;             /* Number of children */
    void (*on_shutdown)(void *ctx);  /* Shutdown callback */
    void *shutdown_ctx;              /* Callback context */
} hive_supervisor_config;

#define HIVE_SUPERVISOR_CONFIG_DEFAULT { \\
    .strategy = HIVE_STRATEGY_ONE_FOR_ONE, \\
    .max_restarts = 3, \\
    .restart_period_ms = 5000, \\
    .children = NULL, \\
    .num_children = 0, \\
    .on_shutdown = NULL, \\
    .shutdown_ctx = NULL \\
}
.fi
.SS Starting a Supervisor
.BR hive_supervisor_start ()
creates a new supervisor actor that immediately spawns and monitors all
specified children. The supervisor runs until stopped or until restart
intensity is exceeded.
.PP
The
.I sup_actor_cfg
parameter configures the supervisor actor itself (stack size, priority, etc.).
Pass NULL for defaults.
.SS Stopping a Supervisor
.BR hive_supervisor_stop ()
sends an asynchronous stop request to the supervisor. The supervisor will
stop all children and then exit. Use
.BR hive_monitor (3)
to be notified when shutdown completes.
.SS Restart Intensity
The supervisor tracks restart attempts within a sliding time window. If
.I max_restarts
is exceeded within
.I restart_period_ms
milliseconds, the supervisor gives up and shuts down. Set
.I max_restarts
to 0 for unlimited restarts.
.SS Utility Functions
.BR hive_restart_strategy_str ()
returns a string representation of a restart strategy
("one_for_one", "one_for_all", "rest_for_one").
.PP
.BR hive_child_restart_str ()
returns a string representation of a child restart type
("permanent", "transient", "temporary").
.SH RETURN VALUE
Functions returning
.I hive_status
indicate success when
.I status.code
is
.BR HIVE_OK .
.PP
.BR hive_restart_strategy_str ()
and
.BR hive_child_restart_str ()
return static string pointers that should not be freed.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B HIVE_ERR_INVALID
NULL config or out_supervisor, too many children, NULL children array with
non-zero count, NULL child function, or invalid supervisor ID.
.TP
.B HIVE_ERR_NOMEM
No supervisor slots available (see HIVE_MAX_SUPERVISORS), failed to spawn
supervisor actor, or failed to send stop message.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Supervisor limits are defined in
.IR hive_static_config.h :
.TP
.B HIVE_MAX_SUPERVISOR_CHILDREN
Maximum children per supervisor (default: 16).
.TP
.B HIVE_MAX_SUPERVISORS
Maximum concurrent supervisors (default: 8).
.SH NOTES
.SS Implementation
The supervisor is implemented as a regular actor that uses
.BR hive_monitor (3)
to watch child actors. When a monitored child dies, the supervisor receives
an EXIT message and applies the configured restart strategy.
.SS Memory
Supervisor state is allocated from a static pool (no malloc). Child arguments
are copied to fixed-size storage within the supervisor state.
.SS One Monitor Per Child
Each child consumes one entry from the global monitor pool
(HIVE_MONITOR_ENTRY_POOL_SIZE). Plan pool sizes accordingly.
.SS Shutdown Callback
The
.I on_shutdown
callback is called from the supervisor actor context just before it exits.
This can be used for cleanup or logging. The supervisor has already stopped
all children when this callback runs.
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
#include <hive_runtime.h>
#include <hive_supervisor.h>
#include <stdio.h>

void worker(void *arg) {
    int id = *(int *)arg;
    printf("Worker %d started\\n", id);

    /* Do work... */

    hive_exit();
}

void on_shutdown(void *ctx) {
    printf("Supervisor shutting down\\n");
}

int main(void) {
    hive_init();

    /* Define children */
    static int ids[3] = {0, 1, 2};
    hive_child_spec children[3] = {
        {.id = "worker-0", .fn = worker, .arg = &ids[0],
         .arg_size = sizeof(int), .restart = HIVE_CHILD_PERMANENT,
         .actor_cfg = HIVE_ACTOR_CONFIG_DEFAULT},
        {.id = "worker-1", .fn = worker, .arg = &ids[1],
         .arg_size = sizeof(int), .restart = HIVE_CHILD_PERMANENT,
         .actor_cfg = HIVE_ACTOR_CONFIG_DEFAULT},
        {.id = "worker-2", .fn = worker, .arg = &ids[2],
         .arg_size = sizeof(int), .restart = HIVE_CHILD_TRANSIENT,
         .actor_cfg = HIVE_ACTOR_CONFIG_DEFAULT},
    };

    /* Configure supervisor */
    hive_supervisor_config cfg = {
        .strategy = HIVE_STRATEGY_ONE_FOR_ONE,
        .max_restarts = 5,
        .restart_period_ms = 10000,
        .children = children,
        .num_children = 3,
        .on_shutdown = on_shutdown,
    };

    /* Start supervisor */
    actor_id sup;
    hive_supervisor_start(&cfg, NULL, &sup);

    hive_run();
    hive_cleanup();
    return 0;
}
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hive_spawn (3),
.BR hive_link (3),
.BR hive_ipc (3),
.BR hive_types (3)
